I have reviewed the manuscript titled "The Second Data Release of the INT
Photometric H-alpha Survey of the Northern Galactic Plane (IPHAS DR2)" by
Geet Barentsen et al.  This paper describes an important survey and its data
products that will enable a broad range of research concerning the Milky Way
and will complement a growing number of near and mid-infrared surveys that
cover the same regions.  Because this an important reference for a significant
new sky survey, I recommend this paper for publication.  However, I have a number
of recommendations for the authors that should be addressed before publication.

I would like to begin by commending and thanking the IPHAS team for carrying out
the survey and tackling the monumental task of processing and validating the data
products and releasing them to the community.  Massive sky surveys such as these
enable not just the scientific investigations of the survey team, but in fact
benefit the entire scientific community, enabling science far beyond even the
realm originally envisioned by the planners.  We are indebted to your efforts.

I have approached this review under the assumption that this paper is intended to
be the primary documentation that will guide user's of the IPHAS catalogue and images,
and will serve as an important reference to the survey and data processing in
the future.  My comments are focused especially in areas in which I believe
additional or more detailed information will provide for a better User's Guide.
It may be that additional documentation is planned for the IPHAS web site, and
some of what is suggested in this review may be contained therein.  However, such
documentation was not present at the site when this review was being conducted.

The comments below start with high level remarks about the paper, and then follow with
more specific remarks grouped by the main section number.

1. This manuscript presents a large amount of information about IPHAS and the preparation
of and contents of the data products.  It also relies heavily on previous
publications for general descriptions of the survey, particulars of the instrumentation,
data processing algorithms and earlier data releases.   As such, it puts considerable burden on the readers to track down information from many different sources.  It is
understandable that the authors prefer to not duplicate information that is already
available elsewhere, but it will make it much easier to understand and use the IPHAS data
products if at least some of the general information  could be repeated in this
manuscript.

For example, it would be helpful to include concise summary of the IPHAS survey
parameters and this data release in tabular form.  This summary would serve as
a "IPHAS-At-A-Glance" for users, and coule include the survey area, dates, telescope,
camera and survey bandpasses, etc.  Much of the information is presented in the paper,
but widely spread over the manuscript.  Without at least a guide to finding the
information, users will be challenged to find what they need.


2. It was not immediately obvious if the images and catalogue from the Second IPHAS
release supersede those in the 2008 Initial Data Release.  I believe the
Second Release includes a reprocessing of all of the survey data to-date, so it
is intended to replace the Initial Release, but that should be stated explicitly
in the Introduction (e.g. in the 3rd paragraph).

If my assumption is correct, there should be a summary statement about why the
Second Release images and catalogue are in fact better products.  For example,
better calibrations, processing algorithms, etc.

3. As stated in Section 7.2, the aim of IPHAS is to enable the discovery of
emission line objects in the Galactic Plane.  Consequently, I was very surprised
that no discussion of the sensitivity to line emission (e.g. H-alpha EW) was
presented in the manuscript.  Perhaps this will be addressed further in the planned
Barentsen et al paper, but it seems that at least some rudimentary demonstration
of the sensitivity to line emission is a requirement for this paper.  The
general photometric sensitivity in the three bands is discussed in section 6.2, and
an illustration is given how to find emission-line candidates using the color-color
diagram in Figure 18.  I strongly recommend that at least some examples be given
of the r-H-alpha color excess as a function of line EW for a sample of objects
with published spectra.

4. Many of the successful large surveys include a list of known caveats concerning
released data products to help user's avoid pitfalls in their research.  I suggest that
the authors generate a short list of the most important things about which users
should be aware when using IPHAS data.  Users appreciate knowing how to avoid mistakes
due to misinterpretation of known issues, and do not think less of a product because
of them.

5. In general, the images do not receive the same level of description in the manuscript
as does the Catalogue.  Any guidance that can be given to users about them would be
beneficial.  For example, at the very least include a description of the FITS image
headers, analogous to the descriptions of the catalog columns that is given in
the Appendix.  They should also mention that tables containing the image metadata are available at IPHAS web site.

6. The fact that only 39% of the catalogue entries satisfy the criteria necessary to be
classified as "reliable" begs the question "just what are the other 61% of objects."
The authors should add more information about the general reliability of the
catalogue with and without their criteria. For example, If a users selects
"reliable" category sources, what should they expect the net reliability to be?
Certainly not 100%.  How does reliability vary with source magnitude, SNR, or other measurement parameters?  How much does the reliability vary with source environment
(e.g. crowding, complex backgrounds)?

Reliability can be gauged in a number of ways, such as comparisons with external,
deeper catalogues (e.g. SDSS, UKIDSS GPS).

7. The authors have done a good job describing the photometric measurements and
calibration accuracy.  However, there is relatively little discussion of the
astrometric position reconstruction other than saying it is done relative to
the 2MASS Point Source Catalogue, and there is no validation of the astrometric
quality of the Catalogue other than to mention matching success.  Some quantification
of the astrometric performance should be added (e.g. mean position residuals as a function
of magnitude from comparisons with the astrometric reference stars, or external
astrometric collections, such as UCAC4).

Positions in the IPHAS Catalogue have been reconstructed with respect to 2MASS.
However, the authors do not state if the proper motion of the 2MASS reference stars was taken into account.  Although small, the net motion of the reference stars can
collectively imprint on the Catalogue because the IPHAS observations were made at
different epochs than 2MASS, in some cases as much as 12 years later.   Failure to do so can imprint the proper motion onto IPHAS, and also because the IPHAS measurements span nearly 10 years (2003-2012), there can be secular variations.

9. The authors point out in the introduction that IPHAS will complement a number of
new infrared surveys of the Galactic Plane.  The paper would benefit from at least
one cross-comparison with the catalogue of one of those surveys, such as GLIMPSE
or MIPSGAL, as an illustration of how the combination of surveys will enable
new science.  At present, the only tie-in to the infrared surveys is the
visual comparison between IPHAS and GLIMPSE images of one field.


The following are additional comments that address specific sections of the paper.

1. In Section 3.1, paragraph 1, sentence 1:

"archival" should be "archiving"


2. In the second paragraph of section 3.1, it is stated that a deblending routine
is used to remove contaminating sources.  Additional information about this routine
should be provided.  Are contaminants removed from the sky background measurement,
the source measurement aperture, both?

3. At the beginning of the Data Reduction section (section 3), it would be helpful
to provide a summary of how data processing for this release differed from that
used for the Initial Data Release.

4. The following two comments refer to section 3.2 on Quality Control.

4.a. It is stated in section 3.2 that the exposures were discarded unless they
had 5-sigma limiting magnitudes of r>20 or i>19 and H-apha>19 mag. How were the
limiting magnitudes for an exposure estimated?

4.b. Section 3.2 also specifies that an ellipticity limit of eps>0.3 was used.
What is the justification of this limit?  For example, what is the potential impact on
photometry and sensitivity at eps=0.25?

5. The following comments refer to section 4 on Photometric Calibration

5.a. Were the atmospheric extinction coefficients of 0.09 (r) and 0.05 (i) simply
adopted, or was there any attempt to measure them?  Is there an estimate of
how much the extinction may have varied with time, either during a night, or
seasonally?

5.b. The PERCORR factor in equation 1 is used to correct for "sporadic gain variation."
What was the nature of the variations when non-zero?  How was it measured?
What is the size of the correction when it was applied?

5.c. The first paragraph of section 4.2 on Global Calibration states that calibration
errors  can be up to 0.1 magnitude in reference to the colour-colour diagram shown in
Figure 4a. There are outlier populations in that figure that are up to 0.6 mags
from the main locus of points.  These seem to be accurately corrected by
the recalibration, but the text seems to understate the severity of the
systematics.

5.d.  It is stated in section 4.2, paragraph 2 that 2MASS observed six calibration
fields each hour.  That is not correct.  2MASS observed two calibration fields each hour.  However, each observation of a field consisted of six scans.

5.e The authors may wish to specify in Section 4.3 that the SDSS DR9 Galactic Plane data
that were used to test the IPHAS calibration were specifically from the SEGUE program
of SDSS II, and cite the appropriate reference for SEGUE.


6. The following comments refer to Section 5 on Catalogue Generation.

6.a. Section 5.1

Would it be possible to provide the aperture corrections applied to the aperture
photometry for each image along with the image metadata?

Shouldn't the "saturated" column flag be specified per band?  Surely it must
be possible for extremely red objects to be saturated in the i-band exposure
but not r-band.

6.b. Section 5.2

Little information about the specifics of band-merging is provided other than the
reference to Taylor 2006 and TMATCHN.  Users will be forced to track down
the reference to understand the process.  The authors should consider giving a short
summary of the algorithm.  Some important information that should be provided are:

- How is confusion handled in the band merging process (e.g. what happens when
more than one i-band detection can be matched to an r-band detection?).
Source confusion in the band-merging process is mentioned in the final
paragraph of section 6.3.

- Is there any band-filling when a source is not detected in all bands?  If so, what
is the algorithm used to provide the flux limits in the non-detected bands?


6.c. Section 5.3 - Table 4

It is not clear what is the specific value is of the average magnitude given for each of
the different band-detection combinations in Table 4?  Wouldn't something like the peak
of the log N - log M curves be of more interest to provide some sense of the
completeness and/or depth of the Catalogue?

6.d. Section 5.4

While the authors provide a thorough description of the criteria used for
Catalogue selection, no reasons were offered for why those criteria were adopted.
For example, were there requirements for completeness and reliability that were
being satisfies?  If not, what were the objectives?

In the first paragraph of section 5.4, it is stated the three criteria were
enforced to limit the size of the catalogue.  Was this the main driver for establishing
the top-level criteria?  It seems unusual in this day and age of massive catalogues
that this would be a driver.

As stated earlier in this review, some description should be offered as to the nature of
the very large number of detections in the catalogue that are not classified as "reliable."
It would be useful to describe them to the user, and to offer suggestions of
how to recognize problematic detections, and also ones that may be real.

7. Section 6.1, par. 2, sentence 1

Should the work "accuracy" be "reliability"?

8. Figure 11 - caption

The reference to the left and right panels should presumably be to the top and bottom panels,
unless the two figures will be arranged differently in the published version.